In this lesson, we'll explore the options for hosting multiple web sites, either for clients or your
own sites.
You'll see how shared hosting can be a good place to start, but managed or self-managed hosting offers
advantages that are hard to beat.
By the end of this video, you'll understand what plans with grid pain, flywheel and safe ground work
best for hosting multiple WordPress web sites.
Let's start by talking about hosting for multiple web sites.
It could be your own multiple websites or client websites, but let's review some of the hosting concepts
that we talked about in a previous section of the course.
Relative to the hosting programs that I recommend and use in my business.
First of all, grid pain grid pain is a self-managed cloud hosting system where you pay grid pay and
a singular fee for their software stack that builds WordPress on top of servers that you pay for separately,
and you also have support with them at some different levels.
And so if you're hosting 10 sites or more, especially client sites, that potentially might need to
be changed around or scaled up or down.
This is the best way to go.
If it's a little bit more money initially, then if you're just starting out, you may want to choose
something different and we're going to go over a couple of different options in this lesson.
But good paying offers a starting panel plan for $50 a month.
Now it's the same per month, whether you build it annually or monthly.
But the big difference is that if you choose monthly, they allow you to host 50 sites through the program.
If you pay annually, you can have an unlimited number of sites.
And as we talked about in the hosting lesson earlier in the course, you can set up an unlimited number
of different servers and pay for those servers at a rate of, say, 10 or $20 a month for maybe 20 to
40 websites that you can fit on each of those servers.
If you have a larger client site or your own site that requires either like a busy WooCommerce eCommerce
store or an LMS or learning management system or a membership site where a lot of people have to be
logged in and using the site at once, you may want to limit the number of sites that you have on each
server.
But that's so controllable with the grid ping system it's super, super easy to use.
I do recommend the developer account if you're going to be hosting client sites and especially many
sites, but you can see that the price is a little bit more, of course, than the panel site.
The big difference is that you get direct support with experienced WordPress developers and system administrators
for the hosting and server, whereas in the panel site you get the community where the grid ping professionals
do plug into the community help and forum section where you can post your questions and research, and
look and search through four for other things that you might need to know.
But you don't get direct support tickets unless you use the developer level.
Now, I do recommend that you start a few client sites and charge for website care and hosting so that
those client accounts can pay for your hosting.
You can easily upgrade from panel up to the developer account with grid pain, and it allows you to
have the most flexible plans for hosting multiple websites.
But let's move on to Flywheel, which we've practiced with a little bit using the 60 day free trial
that they've offered students of the course and built one of our sites in Flywheel.
Now, Flywheel is a great managed WordPress hosting company, and with that they do the same type of
thing as it was doing.
You know, they use very powerful, cloud based and scalable servers, but you don't really have transparency
or control over the particularities of those servers.
They manage that for you.
And with both good paying and flywheel because they're more advanced, they use the best practice of
not including email bundled into the hosting of the website.
So email hosting will have to be done in a different place, as you've learned in previous chapters
of the course.
And with Flywheel, one of the things that they specialize in is just making it easy for a freelancer
or a website agency owner to use the all inclusive platform to provide hosting for client sites as well
as within flywheel.
They have some of these features that include client billing client communications, which makes it
super easy to manage client websites.
And we'll go into a little bit more detail about the growth suite that Flywheel offers as far as things
that you're able to do managing your client websites.
Now, another thing that Flywheel offers is you can pass on the billing to your client.
And I just wanted to point out this about about flywheel hosting.
When you are hosting with Flywheel, you can choose to pay for your own bulk plan or multiple website
plan with flywheel in that you can host multiple websites for clients ET.
But you can also choose to build sites using the demo sites feature and then just pass on the billing
to the client.
And what this allows you to do if you'd like the client to pay for their hosting directly to their hosting
company at Flywheel, they can still have you as their support and their developer.
However, it places Flywheel as the first line of support in case the WordPress website goes down for
some reason, or they're having an issue where they need to contact the hosting company, say, in the
middle of the night or something like that, Flywheel will offer their support directly to your client.
Skipping over you as the first line of defense as far as any hosting issues, I personally prefer to
provide hosting and website care to my clients directly for a price, and then I pay for those sites
myself within my hosting companies that I use, particularly grid pain at this point.
However, I never really have to, you know, have to answer questions in the middle of the night.
And rarely, if ever, do I have clients asking that to to access the hosting account behind their websites.
I just manage all of that for them, and because I manage it well with very good support and companies
like Grid Pain and Flywheel, I really never have any issues in the middle of the night or get any calls
from the client like that.
But some people prefer to pass the billing on through a company like Flywheel directly to their clients,
and that's something that you can do if you're just starting out.
Site Ground is a great shared hosting company.
And there's a few options here, but let's talk about pricing a little bit with a company like site
ground that offers shared hosting now shared, meaning that the servers that your websites are hosting
on are also shared by other clients that you don't know, and a site around is splitting larger servers
among many, many, many clients.
And so you potentially could have the noisy neighbor problem where client sites might get, you know,
flagged for spam, or they could get a whole bunch of traffic and a rush on resources.
And you're only left with the leftover resources in that case, and you don't really have control over
what other sites are doing on that server.
And so I don't really recommend shared hosting for reselling client sites, but it is a good place that
you can start out as long as you're aware that you may need to migrate your sites to a stronger host
in the future.
And it is the way that I started out in my business.
So if you're starting out, it is a good way to get a low dollar hosting program.
If we work at the look at the hosting plans, the shared hosting plans site ground that they offer here.
You know, we've talked about this in the hosting section of the course before the start up.
I don't recommend because it's very limited.
It is the lowest cost, but it only allows for one website, and it also doesn't include a staging environment
for doing controlled updates and things like that.
And so starting with either grow big or go geek, you know you can get a certain amount of discounted
hosting if you pay for it all in advance, like up to a year or more.
However, think of it as the real price, so this is a twenty four point ninety nine per month.
It does say unlimited websites, but you're limited in terms of your visit, number of visits and then
number of gigabytes of web space that you're allowed.
So starting with Groberg, I would probably only put up to 10 sites on that server and that shared hosting
plan.
Go geek, you might go from up to 10, maybe 20 static or brochure type simple WordPress websites,
but eventually you may want to move up from there.
And if you're already hosting email for those sites that is bundled within the shared website hosted
here, I know that's convenient to set up, but it's a little bit of a pain to migrate away from that
once you're already entrenched into the shared website hosting environment, especially with email bundled.
And so it's not a recommended spot.
Moving on and scaling, but it's a good place to start out with.
If you're just starting from scratch and you're getting some of your first client sites, then this
is a good.
Place to start out now, a second does offer something called cloud hosting.
That is a little bit closer to a scalable, you know, server based website hosting program.
And I did host many websites.
I host between 40 and 60 client websites on a site ground cloud hosting program for many years, and
I do think that it's a great program.
Although looking at the overall cost per month and per year, I was able to move over to Flywheel and
then subsequently to grid pain and save a lot of money as far as my business's costs for even more power,
better support and more easily scalable services.
Also website cloning better staging a whole lot of advantages for moving to grid pain from this.
However, if you look at the say, jump start $100 a month gets you a four CPU core and eight gigabytes
of memory.
You know, server.
However, as you remember, you may remember looking as we talked about the hosting programs in the
hosting section of the course, you know, a four CPU, eight gig memory server only costs $20 a month.
And so what you're paying for here is the site ground layer of, you know, control panel and, you
know, email bundled.
You do.
You are able to control each of your client sites in a control panel based on web hosting W.H.
Am Control Panel, meaning web host management system so that you can control each of your client sites
individually.
And basically, what you're doing here is you're setting up your own shared website hosting plan, but
it's only shared between your own websites, your own client sites.
Same thing we're doing over here at grid pain, except it's just more expensive.
You do get good support with site ground and you're just not in control of your resources here.
And as you grow, it's going to go up as you go.
So, you know, an eight CPU, 12 gigabytes of memory might only cost you $40 a month at one of the
server plans if you're using something like good pain, but you could see that this is a bit more.
And so that is available.
But as far as site ground, it's a good place to start out.
And I would recommend the Groberg or the Go geek program for hosting multiple sites.
But above and beyond that flywheel is an excellent managed choice if you just want to leave it to the
professionals to manage the server and grid pain is a great sort of hybrid setup where you are having
really the best and fastest performance for any WordPress site in the world with the software stack
that they use.
You have 100 percent complete transparency over the servers that you're using, and you are able to
control scaling servers up and back down as needed.
And so the cost per website for multiple sites is going to be the lowest if you're using a system like
grid pain and getting your own servers yourself.
However, you do have to do a little bit of management and, you know, control where those sites are.
It is super easy with grid vein to clone and move sites between servers, and so that makes it easy
to use.
Also, if you are and be able to get to the developer account above and beyond the panel, you get the
best support there is of people that really know WordPress and really no system administration.
And so they can help you to manage scaling up and scaling back down or if there are any problems with
your WordPress sites.
So that's a good overview as far as hosting multiple sites for yourself or client sites and reselling
those as a part of your hosting and website care plans and the way that I would recommend moving forward
is one of those three paths.